---
title: Contextuality in quantum computing
author:
- Henri de Boutray
date: 2022-12-06
bibliography:
- lib.bib
abstract: |
  Studying properties of quantum system can lead to many improvements on our
  ability to use quantum information/computing. In this spirit, this article
  presents one of these quantum properties called contextuality. After presenting
  it, I focus on a specific definition of contextuality that I studied in depth,
  and show how it could be useful for quantum information.
tags: ['contextuality', 'Quantum computing']
status: draft
---

Quantum Mechanics is know as a counter intuitive field, where things
seen as impossible in our day to day life are perfectly normal. The two
examples commonly given when mentioning this counter intuitive aspect of
quantum mechanics is mentioned are the superposition (the fact that
Schrödinger’s cat is both dead and alive as long as its box isn’t opened
(Schrödinger 1935)) and the entanglement (the fact that two particles
can be in a state where acting on one of them would seemingly
immediately have an effect of the other, such as measuring one of the
qubits of the Bell state (Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen 1935)). Other
properties such as the destructive nature of the quantum measure (also
related to Schrödinger’s cat thought experiment) can be mentioned, but
today, I will present you a property that is less popular, but as
disconcerting the first time you cross its path: the *contextuality*!

Contextuality is linked to another notion called locality (itself linked
to entanglement) as explored in (Abramsky and Brandenburger 2011) and to
hidden variable theories, but we will focus here on a fresh look on the
subject by trying to start from an easy to grasp common ground, and
introducing only strictly necessary notion as we go.

So! We call an situation contextual when it’s actors need a knowledge of
the context in order to explain the aftermath of the situation. And we
also need to restrict the ability of the actors to only perform *local*
actions (no faster than light communication). Given this, let’s see a
situation where we would like to see if the situation is contextual or
not.

<figure>
<img src="resources/medium.png" style="height:6cm"
alt="Picture of a medium generated by DALL·E 2" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Picture of a medium generated by DALL·E
2</figcaption>
</figure>

Let’s say that we are very worried about a loved one who is at the other
end of the world, potentially doing dangerous activities. In order to
get reassured, we go and see a medium which would help us see our loved
one and make sure he/she is doing OK. The medium welcomes us with a
cryptic sentence "Your friend is eating your lunch". At this point, you
remember that you forgot the lunch you just on the counter of the
kitchen, with your dog (Milly). It seems like the medium has a *non
local* knowledge of the world: he knows something that happened at a
distance and this without communication with the remote event. But then
you realize that it’s 11:30, you still have your lunch ticket peeking
out of your pocket, and you have Milly’s hairs on your trousers. These
three elements are part of the *context* of the current situation, and
this is probably how the medium guessed what happened (or rather what is
happening). So in the end the experience you just lived could be
explained by a contextual explanation of the event, and the medium has
likely no non local abilities.

# Formal definition

After this wacky example of contextuality in our classical world, let’s
come back on a quantum definition of if. First, some useful notions: The
Pauli matrices are
$$X=\begin{pmatrix}
  0 & 1\\\\
  1 & 0
\end{pmatrix},Y=\begin{pmatrix}
  0 &  -i\\\\
  i & 0
\end{pmatrix} \text{ and } Z=\begin{pmatrix}
  1 & 0\\\\
  0 &-1
\end{pmatrix},$$
and we will also use the 2 by 2 identity matrix *I*.

We consider a thought experiment where we perform operations on a *n*
qubits system, and I will show you that this thought experiment exhibits
a contextual behavior. The experiment is composed of several series of
measurements using the operators of the Pauli group, defined as
$$\mathcal{O} = \bigotimes\_{i=0}^n P\_i$$
with *s* ∈ { ± 1,  ± *i*} and *P*<sub>*i*</sub> ∈ {*X*, *Y*, *Z*, *I*}.
The result of such measurements is in  ± 1, and the overall result of
the experiment is the product of all measurement result. I will show you
in Sec.
<a href="#sec:link_with_finite_geometries" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:link_with_finite_geometries">3</a> that we can
construct such experiments where where quantum theory can produce a
result non reproducible by classical, non contextual theory.

# Link with other quantum specific properties

What we call quantum properties are quantum specific behaviors. They can
arise directly from the laws of quantum mechanics, such as the
destructive nature of measurements, but they can also be "meta"
properties[1], arising from the superposition of several other quantum
properties. Entanglement is the example of such a meta property (we
couldn’t have entanglement without superposition), and contextuality is
too: the way quantum measurements work is absolutely necessary for
quantum contextuality (the fact that the measure projects the state on
the space corresponding to the result observed is the root of the
contextual behaviors).

Understanding the links between these properties may help us build an
intuition concerning quantum computation. This is likely one of the
reasons why they are so studied! In that regard, let us have a look at
one of the papers reveling on of the deepest links in my opinion: the
2011 paper by S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger (Abramsky and
Brandenburger 2011).

# Link with finite geometries

# Link with quantum programs verification

# At ColibrITD

Abramsky, S., and A. Brandenburger. 2011. “The Sheaf-Theoretic Structure
of Non-Locality and Contextuality.” *New Journal of Physics* 13 (11):
113036. <https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/13/11/113036>.

Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen. 1935. “Can Quantum-Mechanical
Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” *Physical
Review* 47 (10): 777–80. <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777>.

Schrödinger, E. 1935. “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der
Quantenmechanik.” *Naturwissenschaften* 23 (48): 807–12.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01491891>.

[1] this is not a standard name in this context
